<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="tableofcontents.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>A Pæan</h1>
      <p>
         How shall the <span class="verb closed">burial</span> rite be read?
         <br/>The solemn song be sung?
         <br/>The requiem for the loveliest <span class="noun open">dead</span>,
         <br/>That ever <span class="verb open">died</span> so young?
    </p>
      <p>
        Her friends are gazing on her,
        <br/>And on her gaudy bier,
        <br/>And weep!—oh! to dishonor
        <br/>
         <span class="noun closed">Dead</span> beauty with a tear!
    </p>
      <p>
        They loved her for her wealth—
        <br/>And they hated her for her pride—
        <br/>But she <span class="verb open">grew</span> in feeble health,
        <br/>And they love her—that she died.
    </p>
      <p>
        They tell me (while they speak
        <br/>Of her "costly broider'd pall")
        <br/>That my voice is <span class="verb open">growing</span> weak—
        <br/>That I should not sing at all—
    </p>
      <p>
        Or that my tone should be
        <br/>Tun'd to such solemn song
        <br/>So mournfully—so mournfully,
        <br/>That the <span class="noun open">dead</span> may feel no wrong.
    </p>
      <p>
        But she is gone <span class="adv open">above</span>,
        <br/>With young <span class="noun open">Hope</span> at her side,
        <br/>And I am drunk with love
        <br/>Of the dead, who is my bride.—
    </p>
      <p>
        Of the <span class="noun open">dead</span>—<span class="noun open">dead</span> who <span class="verb closed">lies</span>
        <br/>All perfum'd there,
        <br/>With the <span class="noun open">death</span> upon her eyes.
        <br/>And the <span class="noun open">life</span> upon her hair.
    </p>
      <p>
        Thus on the <span class="noun closed">coffin</span> loud and long
        <br/>I strike—the murmur sent
        <br/>Through the gray chambers to my song,
        <br/>Shall be the accompaniment.
    </p>
      <p>
        Thou <span class="verb open">diedst</span> in thy life's June—
        <br/>But thou didst not <span class="verb open">die</span> too fair:
        <br/>Thou didst not <span class="verb open">die</span> too soon,
        <br/>Nor with too calm an air.
    </p>
      <p>
        From more than friends on earth,
        <br/>Thy life and love are riven,
        <br/>To join the untainted <span class="foreign ">mirth</span>
        <br/>Of more than thrones in <span class="noun open">heaven</span>.—
    </p>
      <p>
        Therefore, to thee this night
        <br/>I will no requiem <span class="verb open">raise</span>,
        <br/>But waft thee on thy <span class="verb open">flight</span>,
        <br/>With a <span class="foreign ">Pæan</span> of old days.
    </p>
   </body>
</html>
