<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="tableofcontents.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>Dreams</h1>
      <p>
        Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!
        <br/>My spirit not <span class="verb open">awakening</span>, till the beam
        <br/>Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.
        <br/>Yes! though that long dream were of <span class="adj closed">hopeless</span> sorrow,
        <br/>'Twere better than the cold reality
        <br/>Of <span class="verb open">waking</span> life, to him whose heart must be,
        <br/>And hath been still, upon the lovely earth,
        <br/>A <span class="noun closed">chaos</span> of deep passion, from his birth.
        <br/>But should it be—that dream eternally
        <br/>Continuing—as dreams have been to me
        <br/>In my young boyhood—should it thus be given,
        <br/>'Twere folly still to hope for higher <span class="noun open">Heaven</span>.
        <br/>For I have revelled when the sun was bright
        <br/>I' the summer <span class="noun open">sky</span>, in dreams of <span class="adj open">living</span> light
        <br/>And loveliness,—have left my very heart
        <br/>Inclines of my imaginary apart
        <br/>From mine own home, with beings that have been
        <br/>Of mine own thought—what more could I have seen?
        <br/>'Twas once—and only once—and the <span class="adj open">wild</span> hour
        <br/>From my remembrance shall not pass—some power
        <br/>Or spell had <span class="verb closed">bound</span> me—'twas the chilly wind
        <br/>Came <span class="verb closed">o'er</span> me in the night, and left behind
        <br/>Its image on my spirit—or the moon
        <br/>Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
        <br/>Too coldly—or the stars—howe'er it was
        <br/>That dream was that that night-wind—let it pass.
        <br/>I have been <span class="adj open">happy</span>, though in a dream.
        <br/>I have been <span class="adj open">happy</span>—and I love the theme:
        <br/>Dreams! in their vivid coloring of <span class="noun open">life</span>
        <br/>As in that fleeting, <span class="adj closed">shadowy</span>, <span class="adj closed">misty</span> strife
        <br/>Of semblance with reality which brings
        <br/>To the delirious eye, more lovely things
        <br/>Of <span class="noun open">Paradise</span> and <span class="noun open">Love</span>—and all my own!—
        <br/>Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.
   </p>
   </body>
</html>
