<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="tableofcontents.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>TAMERLANE</h1>
      <h2>1829</h2>
      <p>
            Kind <span class="noun open">solace</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">in</span> a <span class="adj closed">dying</span> hour!
            <br/>Such, father, is not (now) my theme--
            <br/>I will not madly deem that power
            <br/>Of Earth may <span class="verb closed">shrive</span> me of the sin
            <br/>Unearthly pride hath revelled <span class="prep closed">in</span>--
            <br/>I have no time to dote or dream:
            <br/>You call it hope--that fire of fire!
            <br/>It is but <span class="noun closed">agony</span> of desire:
            <br/>If I can hope--O <span class="noun open">God</span>! I can--
            <br/>Its fount is holier--more divine--
            <br/>I would not call thee fool, old man,
            <br/>But such is not a gift of thine.
        </p>
      <p>
            Know thou the <span class="noun closed">secret</span> of a spirit
            <br/>Bowed from its wild pride <span class="prep closed">into</span> shame
            <br/>O yearning heart! I did <span class="verb open">inherit</span>
            <br/>Thy <span class="adj closed">withering</span> portion with the fame,
            <br/>The searing glory which hath shone
            <br/>Amid the Jewels of my throne,
            <br/>Halo of <span class="noun closed">Hell</span>! and with a pain
            <br/>Not <span class="noun closed">Hell</span> shall make me fear again--
            <br/>O craving heart, for the <span class="adj closed">lost</span> flowers
            <br/>And sunshine of my summer hours!
            <br/>The <span class="adj open">undying</span> voice of that <span class="adj closed">dead</span> time,
            <br/>With its interminable chime,
            <br/>Rings, <span class="prep closed">in</span> the spirit of a spell,
            <br/>Upon thy <span class="noun closed">emptiness</span>--a knell.
        </p>
      <p>
            I have not always been as now:
            <br/>The fevered diadem on my brow
            <br/>I claimed and <span class="verb open">won</span> 
         <span class="adv open">usurpingly</span>--
            <br/>Hath not the same fierce heirdom given
            <br/>
         <span class="ref location">Rome</span> to the <span class="ref historical">Cæsar</span>--this to me?
            <br/>The heritage of a kingly mind,
            <br/>And a proud spirit which hath <span class="verb open">striven</span>
            <br/>Triumphantly with human kind.
            <br/>On mountain soil I first drew <span class="noun open">life</span>:
            <br/>The mists of the <span class="ref location">Taglay</span> have <span class="verb open">shed</span>
            <br/>Nightly their dews <span class="prep open">upon</span> my head,
            <br/>And, I believe, the winged strife
            <br/>And tumult of the headlong air
            <br/>Have nestled <span class="prep closed">in</span> my very hair.
        </p>
      <p>
            So late from <span class="noun open">Heaven</span>--that dew--it <span class="verb closed">fell</span>
            <br/>('Mid dreams of an unholy night)
            <br/>
         <span class="prep open">Upon</span> me with the touch of <span class="noun closed">Hell</span>,
            <br/>While the red flashing of the light
            <br/>From clouds that hung, like banners, <span class="prep open">o'er</span>,
            <br/>Appeared to my half-<span class="adj closed">closing</span> eye
            <br/>The pageantry of monarchy;
            <br/>And the <span class="adj closed">deep</span> trumpet-thunder's roar
            <br/>Came hurriedly <span class="prep open">upon</span> me, telling
            <br/>Of human battle, where my voice,
            <br/>My own voice, silly child!--was <span class="verb open">swelling</span>
            <br/>(O! how my spirit would rejoice,
            <br/>And leap <span class="prep closed">within</span> me at the cry)
            <br/>The battle-cry of Victory!
        </p>
      <p>
            The rain came <span class="prep closed">down</span> 
         <span class="prep open">upon</span> my head
            <br/>Unsheltered--and the heavy wind
            <br/>Rendered me mad and <span class="adj closed">deaf</span> and <span class="adj closed">blind</span>.
            <br/>It was but man, I thought, who <span class="verb open">shed</span>
            <br/>Laurels upon me: and the rush--
            <br/>The torrent of the chilly air
            <br/>Gurgled <span class="prep closed">within</span> my ear the <span class="verb closed">crush</span>
            <br/>Of empires--with the <span class="noun closed">captive</span>'s prayer--
            <br/>The hum of suitors--and the tone
            <br/>Of flattery 'round a sovereign's throne.
        </p>
      <p>
            My passions, from that hapless hour,
            <br/>
         <span class="verb open">Usurped</span> a <span class="noun closed">tyranny</span> which men
            <br/>Have deemed since I have reached to power,
            <br/>My innate nature--be it so:
            <br/>But, father, there lived one who, then,
            <br/>Then--<span class="prep closed">in</span> my boyhood--when their fire
            <br/>Burned with a still intenser <span class="noun open">glow</span>
            <br/>(For passion must, with youth, <span class="verb closed">expire</span>)
            <br/>E'en then who knew this iron heart
            <br/>
         <span class="prep closed">In</span> woman's weakness had a part.
        </p>
      <p>
            I have no words--alas!--to tell
            <br/>The loveliness of loving well!
            <br/>Nor would I now attempt to trace
            <br/>The more than beauty of a face
            <br/>Whose lineaments, <span class="prep open">upon</span> my mind,
            <br/>Are--shadows on th' unstable wind:
            <br/>Thus I remember having dwelt
            <br/>Some page of early lore <span class="prep open">upon</span>,
            <br/>With loitering eye, till I have felt
            <br/>The letters--with their meaning--melt
            <br/>To fantasies--with none.
        </p>
      <p>
            O, she was worthy of all love!
            <br/>Love as <span class="prep closed">in</span> infancy was mine--
            <br/>'Twas such as <span class="noun open">angel</span> minds <span class="prep open">above</span>
            <br/>Might <span class="verb closed">envy</span>; her young heart the shrine
            <br/>On which my every hope and thought
            <br/>Were incense--then a goodly gift,
            <br/>For they were childish and upright--
            <br/>Pure--as her young example taught:
            <br/>Why did I leave it, and, adrift,
            <br/>Trust to the fire <span class="prep closed">within</span>, for light?
        </p>
      <p>
            We grew <span class="prep closed">in</span> age--and love--together--
            <br/>Roaming the forest, and the wild;
            <br/>My breast her shield <span class="prep closed">in</span> wintry weather--
            <br/>And, when the friendly sunshine smiled.
            <br/>And she would mark the <span class="adj open">opening</span> skies,
            <br/>I saw no <span class="noun open">Heaven</span>--but <span class="prep closed">in</span> her eyes.
            <br/>Young Love's first lesson is----the heart:
            <br/>For 'mid that sunshine, and those smiles,
            <br/>When, from our little cares apart,
            <br/>And laughing at her girlish wiles,
            <br/>I'd throw me on her throbbing breast,
            <br/>And pour my spirit <span class="prep open">out</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">in</span> tears--
            <br/>There was no need to speak the rest--
            <br/>No need to quiet any fears
            <br/>Of her--who asked no reason why,
            <br/>But turned on me her quiet eye!
        </p>
      <p>
            Yet more than worthy of the love
            <br/>My spirit struggled with, and strove
            <br/>When, on the <span class="noun open">mountain peak</span>, <span class="adj closed">alone</span>,
            <br/>Ambition lent it a new tone--
            <br/>I had no being--but <span class="prep closed">in</span> thee:
            <br/>The world, and all it did <span class="verb closed">contain</span>
            <br/>
         <span class="prep closed">In</span> the earth--the air--the sea--
            <br/>Its joy--its little lot of pain
            <br/>That was new pleasure--the ideal,
            <br/>Dim, vanities of dreams by night--
            <br/>And dimmer nothings which were real--
            <br/>(Shadows--and a more shadowy light!)
            <br/>
         <span class="verb open">Parted</span> upon their misty wings,
            <br/>And, so, confusedly, became
            <br/>Thine image and--a name--a name!
            <br/>Two separate--yet most intimate things.
        </p>
      <p>
            I was ambitious--have you known
            <br/>The passion, father? You have not:
            <br/>A cottager, I marked a throne
            <br/>Of half the world as all my own,
            <br/>And murmured at such <span class="adj closed">lowly</span> lot--
            <br/>But, just like any other dream,
            <br/>Upon the vapor of the dew
            <br/>My own had past, did not the beam
            <br/>Of beauty which did while it thro'
            <br/>The minute--the hour--the day--<span class="verb closed">oppress</span>
            <br/>My mind with double loveliness.
        </p>
      <p>
            We walked together on the crown
            <br/>Of a <span class="adj open">high</span> 
         <span class="noun open">mountain</span> which looked <span class="prep closed">down</span>
            <br/>Afar from its proud natural <span class="noun open">towers</span>
            <br/>Of rock and forest, on the hills--
            <br/>The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers
            <br/>And shouting with a thousand rills.
        </p>
      <p>
            I spoke to her of power and pride,
            <br/>But mystically--<span class="prep closed">in</span> such <span class="noun closed">guise</span>
            <br/>That she might deem it nought beside
            <br/>The moment's converse; <span class="prep closed">in</span> her eyes
            <br/>I read, perhaps too carelessly--
            <br/>A mingled feeling with my own--
            <br/>The flush on her bright cheek, to me
            <br/>Seemed to become a queenly throne
            <br/>Too well that I should let it be
            <br/>Light <span class="prep closed">in</span> the wilderness <span class="adj closed">alone</span>.
        </p>
      <p>
            I <span class="verb closed">wrapped</span> myself <span class="prep closed">in</span> grandeur then,
            <br/>And donned a visionary crown--
            <br/>Yet it was not that Fantasy
            <br/>Had thrown her mantle <span class="prep open">over</span> me--
            <br/>But that, among the rabble--men,
            <br/>Lion ambition is <span class="verb closed">chained</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">down</span>--
            <br/>And crouches to a keeper's hand--
            <br/>Not so <span class="prep closed">in</span> deserts where the grand--
            <br/>The wild--the terrible <span class="verb closed">conspire</span>
            <br/>With their own breath to fan his fire.
        </p>
      <p>
            Look 'round thee now on <span class="ref location">Samarcand</span>!--
            <br/>Is she not queen of Earth? her pride
            <br/>
         <span class="prep open">Above</span> all cities? <span class="prep closed">in</span> her hand
            <br/>Their destinies? <span class="prep closed">in</span> all beside
            <br/>Of glory which the world hath known
            <br/>Stands she not nobly and <span class="adj closed">alone</span>?
            <br/>
         <span class="verb closed">Falling</span>--her veriest stepping-stone
            <br/>Shall form the pedestal of a throne--
            <br/>And who her sovereign? <span class="ref historical">Timour</span>--he
            <br/>Whom the astonished people saw
            <br/>Striding <span class="prep open">o'er</span> empires haughtily
            <br/>A diademed outlaw!
        </p>
      <p>
            O, human love! thou spirit given,
            <br/>On Earth, of all we hope <span class="prep closed">in</span> 
         <span class="noun open">Heaven</span>!
            <br/>Which <span class="verb closed">fall'st</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">into</span> the soul like rain
            <br/>Upon the <span class="ref location">Siroc</span>-<span class="adj closed">withered</span> plain,
            <br/>And, <span class="verb closed">failing</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">in</span> thy power to bless,
            <br/>But leav'st the heart a wilderness!
            <br/>Idea! which <span class="verb closed">bindest</span> life around
            <br/>With music of so strange a sound
            <br/>And beauty of so wild a birth--
            <br/>
         <span class="noun open">Farewell</span>! for I have <span class="verb open">won</span> the Earth.
        </p>
      <p>
            When Hope, the eagle that <span class="verb open">towered</span>, could see
            <br/>No cliff beyond him <span class="prep closed">in</span> the sky,
            <br/>His pinions were <span class="verb closed">bent</span> 
         <span class="adv closed">droopingly</span>--
            <br/>And homeward turned his softened eye.
            <br/>'Twas sunset: When the sun will part
            <br/>There comes a sullenness of heart
            <br/>To him who still would look <span class="prep open">upon</span>
            <br/>The glory of the summer sun.
            <br/>That soul will hate the ev'ning mist
            <br/>So often lovely, and will list
            <br/>To the sound of the coming darkness (known
            <br/>To those whose spirits hearken) as one
            <br/>Who, <span class="prep closed">in</span> a dream of night, would <span class="verb open">fly</span>,
            <br/>But cannot, from a <span class="noun closed">danger</span> nigh.
        </p>
      <p>
            What tho' the moon--tho' the white moon
            <br/>
         <span class="verb open">Shed</span> all the splendor of her noon,
            <br/>Her smile is chilly--and her beam,
            <br/>
         <span class="prep closed">In</span> that time of dreariness, will seem
            <br/>(So like you gather <span class="prep closed">in</span> your breath)
            <br/>A portrait <span class="verb closed">taken</span> after <span class="noun closed">death</span>.
            <br/>And boyhood is a summer sun
            <br/>Whose <span class="verb closed">waning</span> is the dreariest one--
            <br/>For all we live to know is known,
            <br/>And all we seek to keep hath <span class="verb open">flown</span>--
            <br/>Let <span class="noun open">life</span>, then, as the day-flower, <span class="verb closed">fall</span>
            <br/>With the noon-day beauty--which is all.
            <br/>I reached my home--my home no more--
            <br/>For all had <span class="verb open">flown</span> who made it so.
            <br/>I passed from <span class="prep open">out</span> its mossy door,
            <br/>And, tho' my tread was soft and <span class="adj closed">low</span>,
            <br/>A voice came from the threshold stone
            <br/>Of one whom I had earlier known--
            <br/>O, I defy thee, <span class="noun closed">Hell</span>, to show
            <br/>On beds of fire that burn <span class="prep closed">below</span>,
            <br/>An humbler heart--a <span class="adj closed">deeper</span> woe.
        </p>
      <p>
            Father, I firmly do believe--
            <br/>I know--for <span class="noun closed">Death</span> who comes for me
            <br/>From regions of the blest afar,
            <br/>Where there is nothing to <span class="verb closed">deceive</span>,
            <br/>Hath left his iron gate <span class="adj open">ajar</span>.
            <br/>And rays of truth you cannot see
            <br/>Are flashing thro' <span class="noun open">Eternity</span>----
            <br/>I do believe that <span class="ref religious">Eblis</span> hath
            <br/>A <span class="noun closed">snare</span> 
         <span class="prep closed">in</span> every human path--
            <br/>Else how, when <span class="prep closed">in</span> the holy <span class="noun open">grove</span>
            <br/>I wandered of the idol, Love,--
            <br/>Who daily scents his snowy wings
            <br/>With incense of burnt-offerings
            <br/>From the most unpolluted things,
            <br/>Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven
            <br/>Above with trellised rays from Heaven
            <br/>No mote may shun--no tiniest fly--
            <br/>The light'ning of his eagle eye--
            <br/>How was it that Ambition crept,
            <br/>
         <span class="adj closed">Unseen</span>, amid the revels there,
            <br/>Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt
            <br/>
         <span class="prep closed">In</span> the tangles of Love's very hair!
        </p>
   </body>
</html>
