<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="tableofcontents.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>The Coliseum</h1>
      <p>Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary
<br/>Of <span class="adj open">lofty</span> contemplation left to Time
<br/>By <span class="adj closed">buried</span> centuries of pomp and power!
<br/>At length—at length—after so many days
<br/>Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,
<br/>(Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee <span class="verb closed">lie</span>,)
<br/>I kneel, an altered and an humble man,
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">Amid</span> thy shadows, and so drink within
<br/>My very soul thy <span class="noun open">grandeur</span>, <span class="noun closed">gloom</span>, and glory!</p>
      <p>
         <span class="noun open">Vastness</span>! and Age! and Memories of Eld!
<br/>
         <span class="noun closed">Silence</span>! and <span class="noun closed">Desolation</span>! and <span class="adj closed">dim</span> 
         <span class="noun closed">Night</span>!
<br/>I feel ye now—I feel ye in your strength—
<br/>O spells more sure than e'er <span class="ref religious">Judæan king</span>
         <br/>Taught in the <span class="ref place">gardens of Gethsemane</span>!
<br/>O charms more potent than the rapt <span class="ref nation">Chaldee</span>
         <br/>Ever drew <span class="adv closed">down</span> 
         <span class="prep open">from</span> 
         <span class="adv open">out</span> the quiet <span class="noun open">stars</span>!</p>
      <p>Here, where a hero <span class="verb closed">fell</span>, a column <span class="verb closed">falls</span>!
<br/>Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,
<br/>A <span class="noun closed">midnight</span> vigil holds the swarthy bat!
<br/>Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair
<br/>Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!
<br/>Here, where <span class="prep closed">on</span> golden throne the monarch lolled,
<br/>Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,
<br/>Lit by the wan light of the horned <span class="noun open">moon</span>,
<br/>The swift and silent lizard of the stones!</p>
      <p>But stay! these <span class="noun closed">walls</span>—these ivy-clad <span class="noun closed">arcades</span>—
<br/>These mouldering plinths—these sad and blackened shafts—
<br/>These vague entablatures—this crumbling frieze—
<br/>These shattered cornices—this wreck—this ruin—
<br/>These stones—alas! these gray stones—are they all—
<br/>All of the famed, and the colossal left
<br/>By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?</p>
      <p>"Not all"—the Echoes answer me—"not all!
<br/>Prophetic sounds and loud, <span class="verb open">arise</span> forever
<br/>From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,
<br/>As melody from <span class="ref myth">Memnon</span> to the <span class="noun open">Sun</span>.
<br/>We rule the hearts of mightiest men—we rule
<br/>With a despotic sway all giant minds.
<br/>We are not impotent—we pallid stones.
<br/>Not all our power is gone—not all our fame—
<br/>Not all the magic of our high renown—
<br/>Not all the wonder that <span class="verb closed">encircles</span> us—
<br/>Not all the mysteries that <span class="prep closed">in</span> us <span class="verb closed">lie</span>—
<br/>Not all the memories that hang <span class="prep closed">upon</span>
         <br/>And cling around about us as a garment,
<br/>Clothing us in a robe of more than glory."</p>
   </body>
</html>
