<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="../Poe_Corpus.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>The Village Street</h1>
      <div class="legend">
         <p>Color Codes:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <span class="adv">Word</span> - Adverb</li>
            <li>
               <span class="adj">Word</span> - Adjective</li>
            <li>
               <span class="noun">Word</span> - Noun</li>
            <li>
               <span class="verb">Word</span> - Verb</li>
            <li>
               <span class="prep">Word</span> - Preposition</li>
            <li>
               <span class="det">Word</span> - Determiner</li>
            <li>
               <span class="pron">Word</span> - Pronoun</li>
            <li>
               <span class="conj">Word</span> - Conjunction</li>
            <li>
               <span class="inter">Word</span> - Interjection</li>
            <li>
               <span class="ref">Word</span> - Reference</li>
            <li>
               <span class="foreign">Word</span> - Foreign Word</li>
         </ul>
         <p>Emphasis Codes:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <span class="open">Word</span> - Postive/Open Term</li>
            <li>
               <span class="closed">Word</span> - Negative/Closed Term</li>
         </ul>
      </div>
      <p>
         <span class="prep closed">In</span> these rapid, restless <span class="noun closed">shadows</span>,
<br/>Once I walked at eventide, 
<br/>When a gentle, <span class="adj closed">silent</span> maiden,
<br/>Walked in beauty at my side. 
<br/>She alone there walked beside me 
<br/>All in beauty, like a bride.</p>
      <p>Pallidly the <span class="noun open">moon</span> was shining
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the dewy <span class="noun open">meadows</span> nigh; 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the silvery, <span class="adj closed">silent</span> rivers,
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the <span class="noun open">mountains</span> far and high,—
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the <span class="noun open">ocean</span>'s <span class="noun open">star</span>-lit waters,
<br/>Where the winds a-weary <span class="verb closed">die</span>.</p>
      <p>Slowly, <span class="adv closed">silently</span> we <span class="verb open">wandered</span>
         <br/>
         <span class="prep open">From</span> the <span class="adj open">open</span> cottage <span class="noun open">door</span>, 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">Underneath</span> the elm's long branches
<br/>To the pavement bending o'er; 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">Underneath</span> the mossy willow
<br/>And the <span class="adj closed">dying</span> sycamore.</p>
      <p>With the myriad <span class="noun open">stars</span> in beauty
<br/>All bedight, the <span class="noun open">heavens</span> were seen, 
<br/>
         <span class="adj open">Radiant</span> hopes were <span class="adj open">bright</span> 
         <span class="adv closed">around</span> me,
<br/>Like the <span class="noun open">light</span> of <span class="noun open">stars</span> serene; 
<br/>Like the mellow <span class="noun closed">midnight</span> splendor
<br/>Of the Night's <span class="verb open">irradiate</span> queen.</p>
      <p>Audibly the elm-leaves whispered 
<br/>Peaceful, pleasant melodies,
<br/>Like the <span class="adj open">distant</span> murmured music 
<br/>Of unquiet, lovely <span class="noun open">seas</span>;
<br/>While the winds were hushed in <span class="noun closed">slumber</span> 
         <br/>In the fragrant flowers and trees.</p>
      <p>Wondrous and unwonted beauty 
<br/>Still adorning all did seem,
<br/>While I told my love in fables 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">'Neath</span> the willows by the stream;
<br/>Would the heart have <span class="verb closed">kept</span> unspoken 
<br/>Love that was its rarest dream!</p>
      <p>Instantly away we wandered
<br/>In the shadowy twilight tide, 
<br/>She, the <span class="adj closed">silent</span>, scornful maiden,
<br/>Walking calmly at my side, 
<br/>With a step serene and stately,
<br/>All in beauty, all in pride.</p>
      <p>Vacantly I walked beside her. 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the earth mine eyes were cast;
<br/>Swift and keen there came unto me 
<br/>Bitter memories of the past—
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> me, like the rain in Autumn 
<br/>
         <span class="prep closed">On</span> the <span class="adj closed">dead</span> leaves, cold and fast.</p>
      <p>
         <span class="prep closed">Underneath</span> the elms we parted, 
<br/>By the lowly cottage <span class="noun open">door</span>;
<br/>One brief word alone was uttered—
<br/>Never <span class="prep closed">on</span> our lips before; 
<br/>And <span class="adv open">away</span> I walked forlornly,
<br/>Broken-hearted evermore.</p>
      <p>Slowly, <span class="adv closed">silently</span> I loitered, 
<br/>Homeward, in the <span class="noun closed">night</span>, alone;
<br/>Sudden anguish <span class="verb closed">bound</span> my spirit, 
<br/>That my youth had never known;
<br/>Wild unrest, like that which cometh 
<br/>When the <span class="noun closed">Night</span>'s first dream hath <span class="verb open">flown</span>.</p>
      <p>Now, to me the elm-leaves whisper 
<br/>Mad, discordant melodies,
<br/>And keen melodies like <span class="noun closed">shadows</span> 
         <br/>Haunt the moaning willow trees,
<br/>And the sycamores with laughter 
<br/>Mock me in the <span class="adj closed">nightly</span> breeze.</p>
      <p>
         <span class="adj closed">Sad</span> and pale the Autumn moonlight
<br/>Through the sighing foliage streams; 
<br/>And each <span class="noun open">morning</span>, <span class="noun closed">midnight</span> 
         <span class="noun closed">shadow</span>,
<br/>
         <span class="noun closed">Shadow</span> of my sorrow seems; 
<br/>Strive, O heart, forget thine idol!
<br/>And, O soul, forget thy dreams!</p>
   </body>
</html>
