<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Processed Poem</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="xslthighlight.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <p class="backtomarkup">
         <a href="../Poe_Corpus.xhtml">Back to Table of Contents</a>
      </p>
      <h1>To One in Paradise</h1>
      <div class="legend">
         <p>Color Codes:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <span class="adv">Word</span> - Adverb</li>
            <li>
               <span class="adj">Word</span> - Adjective</li>
            <li>
               <span class="noun">Word</span> - Noun</li>
            <li>
               <span class="verb">Word</span> - Verb</li>
            <li>
               <span class="prep">Word</span> - Preposition</li>
            <li>
               <span class="det">Word</span> - Determiner</li>
            <li>
               <span class="pron">Word</span> - Pronoun</li>
            <li>
               <span class="conj">Word</span> - Conjunction</li>
            <li>
               <span class="inter">Word</span> - Interjection</li>
            <li>
               <span class="ref">Word</span> - Reference</li>
            <li>
               <span class="foreign">Word</span> - Foreign Word</li>
         </ul>
         <p>Emphasis Codes:</p>
         <ul>
            <li>
               <span class="open">Word</span> - Postive/Open Term</li>
            <li>
               <span class="closed">Word</span> - Negative/Closed Term</li>
         </ul>
      </div>
      <p>Thou wast that all to me, love,
<br/>For which my soul did pine—
<br/>A green isle in the <span class="noun open">sea</span>, love,
<br/>A fountain and a shrine,
<br/>All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
<br/>And all the flowers were mine.</p>
      <p>Ah, dream too bright to last! 
<br/>Ah, starry Hope! that didst <span class="verb open">arise</span>
         <br/>But to be <span class="adj closed">overcast</span>! 
<br/>A voice <span class="prep open">from</span> 
         <span class="adv open">out</span> the Future cries,
<br/>"On! on!"—but o'er the Past 
<br/>(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering <span class="verb closed">lies</span>
         <br/>Mute, motionless, aghast!</p>
      <p>For, alas! alas! with me 
<br/>The light of Life is <span class="adv closed">o'er</span>!
<br/>"No more—no more—no more"—
<br/>(Such language holds the solemn <span class="noun open">sea</span> 
         <br/>To the sands upon the shore)
<br/>Shall <span class="verb open">bloom</span> the thunder-blasted tree,
<br/>Or the stricken eagle <span class="verb open">soar</span>! </p>
      <p>And all my days are trances, 
<br/>And all my nightly dreams
<br/>Are where thy dark eye glances,
<br/>And where thy footstep gleams—
<br/>In what ethereal dances,
<br/>By what eternal streams!</p>
      <p>Alas! for that accursed time
<br/>They <span class="verb closed">bore</span> thee o'er the billow,
<br/>From love to titled age and crime,
<br/>And an unholy pillow!
<br/>From me, and from our misty clime,
<br/>Where weeps the silver willow!</p>
   </body>
</html>
